# 1004

Millet could not find any group files.

A group file is one of:

- A SML/NJ Compilation Manager (`.cm`) file.
- A ML Basis (`.mlb`) file.

Millet uses group files to know what source files (aka SML files) to analyze, and in what order.

Millet will look for group files like this:

- If there is a `millet.toml` config file, that is **directly** in the root directory (i.e. the directory onto which editor is opened), which defines a `workspace.root` path glob, it will check that specified path glob for group files.
- Else, if there is no `workspace.root` path glob, it will check for **exactly one** group file contained **directly** in the root directory.

If Millet couldn't find any group files in this way, it emits this error.

Millet needs group files to know what source files to analyze. This means when Millet encounters this error, it is unable to analyze any SML files at all.

## To fix

Try any of the following:

### Change the top directory

By opening your editor onto a different directory, Millet will look for a `millet.toml` and/or a group file in that directory instead.

### Create a Millet config file

Create a `millet.toml` file in the root directory that points at a root group file.

For instance, if you have opened your editor to `~/foo`, and you have a group file at `~/foo/bar/quz.mlb`, you can create `~/foo/millet.toml` with the contents:

```toml
version = 1
workspace.root = "bar/quz.mlb"
```

### Create a group file

Create a group file in the root directory. The simplest group file is a ML Basis file listing all of the SML files in your workspace that you want Millet to analyze, in the order you want to analyze them. For instance, you could create a file `sources.mlb` in your workspace root like this:

```text
foo.sml
lib/bar.sml
many/directories/deep/quz.sml
```

That is, each SML file is listed in order, one per line.
