# 5001

A name was referenced, but it was not defined in that scope.

```sml
val bar = foo
(**       ^^^ undefined value: `foo` *)
```

## To fix

Try any of the following:

### Check spelling and case

Names are case-sensitive in Standard ML and must match exactly with their definition site.

```sml
val foo = 3
val f = Foo
(** + undefined value: `Foo` *)
```

### Check if the name is within a structure

If the name is defined in the current scope unqualified, it may be referenced unqualified. But if it is within a structure, you must qualify the name with that structure.

For instance, `filter` is defined in `structure List`, not at the top level.

```sml
val f = filter
(** + undefined value: `filter` *)
```

Confusingly, come functions like `map` are defined both in `List` and also aliased the top level.

```sml
val m1 = List.map
val m2 = map (* an alias for `List.map` *)
```

You must either mention the structure in a qualified name or open the structure if the name is inside a structure.

```sml
val f1 = List.filter

local
  open List
in
  val f2 = filter
end
```

### Check the kind of name

Check the error message to see what kind of thing was not defined: value, type, structure, etc. These different kinds of items have different namespaces.

In this example, there is a value named `x` defined, but then we try to use `x` as a type. There is no type `x` defined, so this is invalid.

```sml
val x = 4
val y : x = 5
(**     ^ undefined type: `x` *)
```

### Check signature ascription

The name may be explicitly not permitted to be accessed outside of a structure due to a signature ascription.

Ascribing a structure to a more restrictive signature prohibits accessing the "extra" items inside the structure.

```sml
signature SIG = sig
  val foo : int
end

structure Str : SIG = struct
  val foo = 3
  val bar = "hi"
end

val s = Str.bar
(**     ^^^^^^^ undefined value: `bar` *)
```
