# 5028

An attempt was made to bind an expansive expression to a variable, where that variable would then have polymorphic type.

This error is also called the "value restriction".

An expansive expression is one that may raise an exception or allocate memory during evaluation. Some examples of expansive expressions:

| Name                   | Example                       |
| ---------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| Application (see note) | `f x`                         |
| Raise                  | `raise Bad`                   |
| Handle                 | `e handle Bad => e'`          |
| Let                    | `let val x = e in x + e' end` |

Note that an application expression `f x` is considered expansive if:

- The function `f` is the `ref` constructor.
- The function `f` is a "regular" function (i.e. **not** a constructor).
- The argument `x` is expansive.

This means that e.g. `SOME 3` is **not** expansive, because the function (`SOME`) is a non-`ref` constructor, and the argument (`3`) is not expansive.

A polymorphic type is one which contains type variables, like `'a` or `'b`.

If Millet did not emit an error for cases like this, we could break type safety:

```sml
val r : 'a option ref = ref NONE
(**                     ^^^^^^^^ cannot bind expansive polymorphic expression *)
val () = r := SOME "foo"
val v : int = valOf (!r)
```

The first line is forbidden by this error. If it were not, then after the execution of the above program, `v` would have type `int`, but the value `"foo"`, which actually has type `string`.

This is a violation of type safety, namely the highly desirable property of "soundness". In the context of type checkers and type systems, soundness means that:

- If the type checker determines that an expression $e$ has a type $\tau$,
- Then at runtime, the expression $e$ will actually have that type $\tau$.

## To fix

Try any of the following:

- If the expression has function type, add an extra variable to both the binding site and the expression. This is called eta-expansion, the opposite of eta-reduction.

  Before:

  ```sml

  val mapFst =
    List.map (fn (x, _) => x)
  (** + cannot bind expansive polymorphic expression *)

  ```

  After:

  ```sml
  fun mapFst xs =
    List.map (fn (x, _) => x) xs
  ```

- Annotate the expression (or pattern) with a non-polymorphic type.

  Before:

  ```sml
  val r = ref []
  (**     ^^^^^^ cannot bind expansive polymorphic expression *)
  ```

  After:

  ```sml
  val r : int list ref = ref []
  ```
