# Millet for 15-150 students

If you're reading this, you might be an enterprising [15-150][] student attempting to get Millet working with course handouts.

I appreciate your enthusiasm! However, it's possible that you may need to tweak your code a bit for Millet to understand it.

Note that, at time of writing, Millet is **not officially supported** by the 15-150 staff. It's inadvisable to ask TAs how to set up or debug Millet, since they might not even know what it is.

## No support for `$` paths or `CM_LOCAL_PATHCONFIG`

Millet does not support certain SML/NJ CM features used by 15-150 handout files.

Notably, CM files distributed by 15-150 often reference a custom `$` path, `$ONEFIFTY-LIB`. This custom path is defined via the use of a path config file, to which the environment variable `CM_LOCAL_PATHCONFIG` is configured to point.

This is problematic for Millet, because Millet

- ignores all paths that start with `$`.
- does not read any CM environment variables.
- does not read any custom path config files.

To fix, we must manually edit all the CM files that reference to `$ONEFIFTY-LIB`. We will replace each usage of `$ONEFIFTY-LIB` with the correct relative path to the 150 libraries, **for that specific CM file**.

This means when replacing `$ONEFIFTY-LIB`, we must take into account each CM files' own position in the directory structure relative to the 150 libraries. (Indeed, it was probably a desire to _not_ have to do this that `$ONEFIFTY-LIB` was invented.)

These changes should still allow other tools, like SML/NJ, to use the CM files, since we are changing the files to use strictly fewer features.

### Example

Consider this partial directory structure:

```
code/
  foo/
    bar/
      sources.cm
    sources.cm
lib/
  sequence/
    sources.cm
  set/
    sources.cm
  pathconfig
```

We have 4 CM files:

- `code/foo/bar/sources.cm`
- `code/foo/sources.cm`
- `lib/sequence/sources.cm`
- `lib/set/sources.cm`

Note also we have the custom path config file `lib/pathconfig`, which has the contents

```
ONEFIFTY-LIB .
```

which means `ONEFIFTY-LIB` resolves to the current directory (`.`) of the `pathconfig` file, aka `lib`.

Now, we go through each CM file and replace any references to `$ONEFIFTY-LIB`.

#### `code/foo/bar/sources.cm`

This CM file references both `sequence` and `set` from `$ONEFIFTY-LIB`.

We go up 3 directory levels with 3 uses of `..` because we are in 3 nested directories: `code/foo/bar`. Then we go into `lib`.

```diff
--- a/code/foo/bar/sources.cm
+++ b/code/foo/bar/sources.cm
@@ -2,9 +2,9 @@ Library
   signature BAR
   functor MkBar
 is
-  $ONEFIFTY-LIB/set/sources.cm
-  $ONEFIFTY-LIB/sequence/sources.cm
+  ../../../lib/set/sources.cm
+  ../../../lib/sequence/sources.cm

   BAR.sig
   MkBar.fun
```

#### `code/foo/sources.cm`

This CM file only references `set`.

We go up only 2 levels (not 3 as before) because we are in 2 nested directories: `code/foo`. Then we got into `lib`.

Note that we update the `library()` export spec, but this is not strictly necessary because Millet mostly ignores export specs (i.e. the stuff between `Library ... is` or `Group ... is`).

```diff
--- a/code/foo/sources.cm
+++ b/code/foo/sources.cm
@@ -1,7 +1,7 @@
 Library
-  library($ONEFIFTY-LIB/set/sources.cm)
+  library(../../lib/set/sources.cm)

   structure Foo
   signature FOO
@@ -10,10 +10,10 @@ Library
   signature FOO
   structure Tests
 is
-  $ONEFIFTY-LIB/set/sources.cm
+  ../../lib/set/sources.cm

   bar/sources.cm
```

#### `lib/sequence/sources.cm`

This file does not itself use `$ONEFIFTY-LIB`, so no changes are needed.

#### `lib/set/sources.cm`

This file references `sequence`. Note that this file is itself in the `$ONEFIFTY-LIB` directory.

We go up one directory with one `..` and that's it. We're already in `lib`, so no need to add that.

```diff
--- a/lib/set/sources.cm
+++ b/lib/set/sources.cm
@@ -6,7 +6,7 @@ Library
 is
   $/basis.cm

-  $ONEFIFTY-LIB/sequence/sources.cm
+  ../sequence/sources.cm

   EQ.sig

```

## Source files must be in order

Millet requires the files listed in CM files to be in order.

It is a feature of CM that source files within a CM file may be listed out of order. A conforming implementation of CM, such as the one that ships with SML/NJ, will determine the correct order in which to process these source files.

Millet is not a conforming implementation, and it uses the order of SML files listed in CM as the order in which it actually analyzes the files.

### Example

In the following example, Millet will emit an "undefined" error for the reference to the structure `Foo` in `bar.sml`, but SML/NJ will accept the code without errors.

This is because Millet will attempt to analyze `bar.sml` before `foo.sml`, because `bar.sml` comes before `foo.sml` in the `sources.cm` file.

#### `sources.cm`

```sml-nj-cm
Group is
  bar.sml
  foo.sml
```

#### `foo.sml`

```sml
structure Foo = struct
  val x = 123
end
```

#### `bar.sml`

```sml
val _ = Foo.x
```

To have the code be accepted by both SML/NJ and Millet, change the order of the files listed in `sources.cm` to list first `foo.sml`, then `bar.sml`.

```diff
--- a/sources.cm
+++ b/sources.cm
@@ -1,3 +1,3 @@
 Group is
-  bar.sml
   foo.sml
+  bar.sml
```

## Some SML/NJ-isms are not accepted

SML/NJ deviates from the formal [Definition of Standard ML][sml-def] in a few places. Millet accepts and analyzes programs with some of these deviations, but not others.

For instance:

- The Definition forbids `signature` and `functor` declarations to appear within both `local` declarations and `struct ... end` structure-level expressions.
- Millet allows only the former.
- SML/NJ allows both.

To fix, you may have to rewrite some SML handout code.

For instance, here's an example of rewriting to avoid using a `functor` within a `functor`.

```diff
--- a/code/foo/MkFoo.sml
+++ b/code/foo/MkFoo.sml
@@ -1,17 +1,9 @@
 functor MkFoo (Options : OPTIONS) :> FOO = struct
   structure Quz = MkQuz (Options)

-  functor MkDepth (val depth : int) : SETTINGS =
-  struct
-    structure Options = Options
-    val search_depth = depth
-  end
-
-  structure Depth3  = MkDepth (val depth = 3)
-  structure Depth5  = MkDepth (val depth = 5)
-  structure Depth10 = MkDepth (val depth = 10)
+  structure Depth3  = struct structure Options = Options val search_depth = 3 end
+  structure Depth5  = struct structure Options = Options val search_depth = 5 end
+  structure Depth10 = struct structure Options = Options val search_depth = 10 end

   structure Bar3 = MkBar (Depth3)
   structure Bar5 = MkBar (Depth5)
```

## Last resort: turn off the language server

If the errors are too hard to fix, you can turn off the language server for specific directories.

In VS Code, open "Preferences: Open Workspace Settings", search for `millet.useLanguageServer`, and set it to `false`.

The language server will continue to be enabled by default if you open a different folder. This is useful if you want to disable Millet for only one particularly tricky handout.

This doesn't disable SML syntax highlighting, snippets, etc.

[15-150]: https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~15150/
[sml-def]: https://smlfamily.github.io/sml97-defn.pdf
